[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Certainly one
of the most profound landmarks
in our lives is that
of becoming a parent.
And we've all heard
the comment, you
should have to get a
license to have a kid,
when witnessing
unconscious parenting.
While licensing might
not go down well,
a little education should.
How many of our world's
woes would be healed just
through the process
of bringing people
into the world in
a conscious way,
helping them live
a conscious life?
Toward that end, we're speaking
with Catherine Shainberg today.
Welcome, Catherine.
You've made a life out
of helping people birth
their children consciously.
>>CATHERINE SHAINBERG:
I've made part of my life
out of doing that.
>>REGINA: Well, you have
a 40-year history so far
of helping people in general.
Let's give a little
bit of your background
so our audience can
get to know you a bit.
>>SHAINBERG: All right.
So I am an art historian,
but I'm also a psychologist.
But I really am
much more than that.
I don't do therapy.
I really teach people how to
plunge into their subconscious
and understand
what are the deeper
motivations in their lives.
The subconscious is
what moves the body
and helps the body to
adjust to the environment.
So I work with the
subconscious and with dreaming.
I work with visualization
and with imagery.
These are different processes
that we can talk about
if you want when we talk
about the birthing issues.
>>REGINA: Yes,
we'll get into that.
And your degree, your
PhD, is in psychology.
What made you go this
direction into the world
of imagery and dreaming?
>>SHAINBERG: I've
always been an imager.
I've always been a dreamer.
And I was actually searching
for the outer manifestations
of what I was doing.
How images move people
was my interest.
I went into art history
because paintings--
>>REGINA: Yeah, your natural
connection with imagery
makes total sense.
>>SHAINBERG: Exactly.
But what I was really,
really interested
in-- if I, let's
say, took a Matisse
and took away the
lemon in the Matisse,
it would affect a
person's perceptions
and change the person's being.
>>REGINA: Absolutely, yes.
That's very clever.
>>SHAINBERG: And so that
really, really interested me.
And I wanted to know how
I could really apply that.
>>REGINA: Let me
ask you a question.
I don't know if you
have an answer to that.
It's not anything
that you've written
about that I am aware of.
As an art historian, did
you ever witness various art
throughout the ages that had
to do with the birthing process
and notice some really
critical differences of how
things were handled in ancient
times, or in the past, to now?
>>SHAINBERG: Practically nothing
on the birthing experience.
>>REGINA: That's
what I was wondering.
I can't think of it.
>>SHAINBERG: No,
there's practically--
there are lots of
mothers and child's.
Of course, the Madonna--
>>REGINA: The
religious iconography.
>>SHAINBERG: Yes, the
But no, there's
nothing about birthing.
And birthing really
was the domain of women
until maybe the 16th century.
>>REGINA: So men
weren't allowed in.
The artists of the day,
which were dominantly male,
were not really allowed to
even witness the process.
>>SHAINBERG: Not at all.
It was really a private--
>>REGINA: So there's really
not a lot of history.
>>SHAINBERG: --mystery
of the women.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So it's really what's
been handed down
through wives' tales and lore.
>>SHAINBERG: Right.
>>REGINA: OK.
And I'm going to make
a little note here
because I wasn't planning
on asking about this,
but it's popping to mind.
OK, so what you do when
you're working with people--
let's just get a little
background before the birthing
process.
These same techniques can
work in someone's life
for enhancing their performance
in sports, for their challenges
with finances or money.
These are broad-based
techniques really,
even though we're
applying them now
into the birthing
process because you've
done so much in this area.
>>SHAINBERG:
Everybody has a mind
that creates images, and
has a mind, of course,
that creates words.
But there's another
language in the brain
that is the language of images.
That is you
experiencing the world,
and you reflected back into
yourself through images.
These images are very
powerful, and we've
lost contact with them.
Now it's beginning to be of
interest to psychologists,
and sports psychologists
use it all the time
Olympic athletes are trained
to practice, let's say,
their ski descent.
If they do that-- let's say
I'm skiing down the slope.
I'm activating micro
movements in the body.
This is how my body moves.
I see an apple, and without even
being aware or conscious of it,
my mind has gone,
apple, hand, take.
>>REGINA: Yes, you
start maybe salivating.
>>SHAINBERG: I wanted actually
to give that as an example.
For example, you can imagine
that you're in your kitchen
and you cut a lemon in two.
If you imagine
that, what happens?
>>REGINA: Oh, you
start salivating.
>>SHAINBERG: You
>>REGINA: And also
you might have
an upliftment of energy just
from imagining the scent.
>>SHAINBERG: Absolutely.
So it's through the senses
that we activate the body.
And I'm going to talk about
a larger aspect of the body.
But the senses are the ones
that give the imaginal will
inside of you its directions.
So if I cut the lemon in
my imagination, I smell it.
It starts salivating
inside of me.
This means that I can,
if I have precise images,
move anything I want
to move in the body.
>>REGINA: Yes, and affect
your external world.
I was watching a really
silly movie recently,
one of those where you
just want to go brain dead.
And in it, monks were bowling.
Tibetan monks were
at a bowling alley.
And their competition
were some very aggressive
American males--
you know, jocks.
And the monks closed their eyes,
stood at the front of the lane,
and just imagined the
ball going into the pins,
of course, and bowling.
And it would take
a circuitous route,
but they always ended up
knocking down all the pins,
getting a streak.
And I thought, I wonder if
that's something that actually
came from a real experience
that the director or the writer
was tapping into,
because these are
the things we're capable of.
>>SHAINBERG: Absolutely.
I mean, you have
an old book called
"The Art of Zen Archery."
>>REGINA: Yes, that's
right, a very good book.
>>SHAINBERG: And
the way it's done
is you visualize
your arrow going
into the center of the target.
You close your eyes.
You pull the arrow.
>>REGINA: Yes, and this has been
around for quite a long time.
But how many of us
actually do that?
>>SHAINBERG: Thousands of years.
>>REGINA: Thousands of years.
But today, even
though we've had,
what, 30, 40-year
run at it now for all
of these concepts in the
new thinking movement,
we still don't take
advantage of it.
>>SHAINBERG: Well,
because first we've
had the scientific revolution,
which kind of pulled people
away from how you use images.
It was known in the past
how you used images.
But also because
many people have used
what I call visualizations.
They're very simple
storytelling lines.
You go down the path.
You turn right.
You're going to see this.
But really the
power of image comes
from giving it
just a little jolt
so that the body will move
the way it needs to move,
not the way you have
decided to make it move.
>>REGINA: Because it has
its own intelligence that
knows how to best do that.
>>SHAINBERG: It has its own
alignment and intelligence.
And each one of us is
slightly different.
>>REGINA: OK, I have a question.
Have you come across people who
have no ability to visualize?
>>SHAINBERG: Yes.
>>REGINA: And then what?
How do you work with them?
>>SHAINBERG: Well,
there are little
exercises that I give them
that are very, very simple.
99% of them can do it.
I've met one or two
who really could not.
But they dream at night, so
I'd point that out to them.
It's like an intellectual block.
>>REGINA: That's also
what I was going to say.
Yeah, it has to be a block.
>>SHAINBERG: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK, so--
>>SHAINBERG: And I
just wanted to say--
>>REGINA: Please.
>>SHAINBERG: The
way that you really
work with people like that
is you have five senses.
There may be another road.
We use the sight because
it's the most complete
of our senses.
It incorporates the other four.
But I could use touch for
them, or smell, or sound.
Maybe that will change
something for them
because their access
to the subconscious
may be through,
let's say, sound.
>>REGINA: And this is well-known
in the field of hypnotherapy.
When you're trying
to guide a person,
it might be they're
totally kinesthetic.
They can't see.
They can't hear.
But they can feel everything
going on and gain information.
>>SHAINBERG: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Accurate information
through the process
of just feeling.
>>SHAINBERG: And it's very
important to hear the word
"in-for-mation" because
it's form, it's pattern,
that the brain is interested in.
That's how it makes meaning.
So if I touch this
cup, it's round.
And this creates
information inside of me.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
So through the anthroposophical
movement and others,
lots of experimentation have
been done in color labs.
And labs were
using simple forms.
And what they do to the mind.
And one of the protocols
in the Waldorf education,
for example, that I
always appreciated
is with little children.
Until the age of something
like 8 or 9, 10 years old,
all of the corners
are cut off the paper.
And so you have a
rounded field for them
to create in on that paper.
So conceptually, why
would you suppose--
what kind of difference
would that make to a child?
>>SHAINBERG: Well,
if it's rounded,
they have an experience
of what rounded means.
It's much more receptive,
the rounded space,
because there are many,
many, many more points.
Whereas if it's a straight
line, it's much more cutting.
>>REGINA: Oh, right angles.
>>SHAINBERG: Right angles
will be more cutting.
So I don't know why the Waldorf
people have chosen to do that.
But I would imagine that it's
to harmonize their space.
>>REGINA: Yes,
because also Steiner
was not into right
angles in his buildings.
He had interlocking domes that
appeared to be free standing.
It burned down, but interesting.
But again, the whole notion
of being in spaces that
expand consciousness
versus experimentation.
Anyone can do this.
Just look at a blue square
versus a blue circle,
and we have a very
different impact in our mind
and how it feels in the body.
>>SHAINBERG: Well,
actually I teach that.
I teach what I call
morphology, which
is the shape of the human body.
And we inhabit the
simple shapes of nature.
We inhabit squares, rectangles,
circles, ovals, like an egg.
And this means that the one
who inhabits, let's say,
the egg-shaped face has
a different experience
of life than the one who's going
to inhabit the square shape.
Because if you put
yourself in a square shape,
you'll see everything is a
little hard, a little harsh.
If you're in the egg shape,
you have a much softer
relationship.
So for example, what
we call the Venus type
inhabits an egg shape.
And she's sweet, and loves
beauty, and is feminine.
Whereas the square
shape is very--
>>REGINA: More Mars.
>>SHAINBERG: More masculine.
Maybe if it's a little bit more
rectangular, it'll be a Mars.
And so there's a more
aggressive side to the line.
If you think of a
line, it cuts through.
curve, it envelops.
And it touches a lot of things.
>>REGINA: Which is
interesting because you're
dealing with all types
in the birthing process,
all different kinds of mothers.
>>SHAINBERG: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And so you
would have to approach
the woman with a more square-set
face versus an oval shape
very differently,
I would assume.
>>SHAINBERG: Totally.
So the birth professionals
who've studied with me
have studied this so that they
know who they're talking to.
And they're able to talk to
that woman in a way which
fits her morphology.
That makes it much
easier for the woman
to begin to process
what's going through her.
>>REGINA: Now let's talk
about you personally.
You ended up on this
path rather unexpectedly
when you went in for an exam.
And here you are at
41, pregnant, right?
>>SHAINBERG: Well, I've
always done the imagery.
And I studied with a
very great woman teacher
in Israel, one of the few women
Kabbalists in the Jewish world.
And she was teaching that.
And I was led to her
by dreaming, really.
I left everything I was doing.
I was supposed to be in Harvard,
and I ended up in Israel,
studying with her.
So I was meant to do this work.
When I got pregnant
at 41, I had not
expected that,
although I had always
heard my son calling to me.
I'd heard the child
calling, Mom, Mom,
when are you going to be ready?
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
In dreams or in waking?
>>SHAINBERG: In
dreams and in waking.
He was always in the background.
I always knew it was a boy,
and I always heard him calling.
And I felt maybe life has
decided to change that.
But it was still there.
So I was surprised and not
surprised when he did come.
And I applied all of my work
first to the conception,
because I asked the question
before I was pregnant.
I felt, I'm 41.
It's time to ask this question.
Do I really want a child?
My husband was a little older.
He'd had another family.
It was an iffy question.
>>REGINA: Sure.
Yeah, bringing a lot of
energy into a settled kind
of life, so to speak.
>>SHAINBERG: Exactly.
And so I asked the question.
And I created
actually an exercise
that I have in my book on how
to ask a question every day
until you get a question in
your mind, the right question.
Very important because
the right question is
what triggers the subconscious.
So if I ask the
subconscious, well,
what do you think about
that, the subconscious
is not going to move.
I have to find the
right question.
It's like fishing.
I have to throw the
line in the right place
to get the right kind of fish.
So I was fishing into my
subconscious to find out.
And the question that came to
me after every night closing
my eyes for a minute
and asking, what
is the right question about
this, I heard in French-- I'm
French-- [SPEAKING FRENCH],
which means,
will a child pop out of nowhere?
And three weeks
later, I was pregnant.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>SHAINBERG: I was
not only pregnant,
but I had contraception that
should have stopped this.
>>REGINA: Your son
was determined.
>>SHAINBERG: He was
determined to come.
And the question had
provoked the body.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And we were talking off-camera.
In a similar
situation, I was told
from the time I was a
little girl I would never
conceive or have children.
And yet, for 12 years,
I had dreams of my son.
And the same scenario over
and over, to the point
where I'd wake up.
I'd pinch myself.
In the dream, I would
believe I had awakened,
and I'd pinch myself.
Ah, it's real this time.
And then sometimes there'd
be layers and layers down
in the dream before
I'd actually wake up.
And I'd done that
a couple times,
saying, no, you
were tricked before.
You were actually
asleep, not awake.
And so when he came
into the world,
he was exactly as I had
seen all of those years.
And it was as easy-- odd,
but as easy a birth--
as I had seen in my
dreams over and over.
>>SHAINBERG: The subconscious
lives in a no-time space.
Einstein talks about
the space-time.
It's a no-time space.
And therefore it knows.
It's as if the body is
much vaster than the limits
that you have.
And it knows.
It knows its future.
So it can see very clearly.
If we are clear inside,
if we are connected,
it'll show us very clearly
what is supposed to happen.
>>REGINA: And you had
a visionary experience.
Once you decided to take this
whole area on in your career,
you had a visionary
experience as you
were about to
inaugurate some doulas.
>>SHAINBERG: Well, what
happened was I had my son.
Everything happened the way I--
>>REGINA: You saw it would.
>>SHAINBERG: I saw it would.
He came out exactly the
way as your son did.
Many years later,
one of my students
who was a doula, a woman who
accompanies women at birth--
not a midwife, but a doula.
>>REGINA: Explain the
difference between the two.
>>SHAINBERG: The
midwife is medically
allowed to facilitate the
birth, to be there at the birth.
The doula is a woman who
accompanies the mother
to help her through the process
of birthing in a supportive
way.
>>REGINA: But isn't
actually involved
in bringing the body
of the baby out.
>>SHAINBERG: No, and doesn't
do any of the manipulations.
In fact, a doula is
what we used to have.
We used to be surrounded
by the neighbors.
They'd come in.
And they knew, well, certain
herbs would help with dilation,
and certain massages would
help the mother's back pain
and so forth.
So they knew that, and
that's what the doula does.
>>REGINA: OK, so continue.
So there was a doula
in the group, and--
>>SHAINBERG: There
was a doula who
was my student, Claudia Raiken.
And there's a picture of
her in the book, actually.
And she said to me,
would you do this?
If I put together a group
of birth professionals,
would you use
imagery for birthing?
And I said, well, I
have to think about it,
because I had only done
that for my own son
and for a few students
here and there.
And I said, I'll think
about it during the weekend.
And that weekend, I
went off to an auction.
It was quite by chance.
I got to the auction, and quite
by chance-- I sat through it.
And there was there
a big African doll
that I thought was very ugly.
But for some reason,
in my dreaming awake,
she kept on waving at
me, buy me, buy me.
And so I finally
bought her for nothing,
for $20, took her home,
put in her my entrance.
And of course, the
next day a friend
came by with an African dealer.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>SHAINBERG: This just happened.
It was completely by chance.
And he completely flipped.
He said, you've
got a spirit doll.
You've got a
fertility doll that is
given from mother to daughter
to help with a good birth.
>>REGINA: How perfect is that?
>>SHAINBERG: How perfect.
The universe was talking to
me, you've got to do this.
So I did.
>>REGINA: And so
you were working,
as we go into now the
birthing part itself,
with a group of women
for seven years.
>>SHAINBERG: Yes.
>>REGINA: And you
met once a week.
Can you talk about
how you gathered them
together, and the nature of that
group, and what you produced?
>>SHAINBERG: Well,
the group was gathered
by Claudia Raiken,
the doula who had
asked me to put this together.
And they were all
birth professionals.
One was a psychologist who
dealt with conception issues.
One was another who dealt
with loss after birth.
And the others
were all doulas who
were deeply involved
in the birth process,
and being doulas for
20 years, some of them.
And so they came and would
tell me what they needed.
Oh, what do we do if
there's high blood pressure?
What do we do if there's edema?
What do we do for
morning sickness?
So what do we do if
the mother's terrified?
Is there some way
to calm her fears
and bring her into
a better space?
And of course, the
imagery exercises
that I create are very,
very short, a few seconds
for the induction.
And the result is
like the subconscious
jumps up and shows
them images that
clear what they need to clear.
>>REGINA: So it's done
to elicit their own.
Rather than telling them,
this is how it goes,
this is what your
image should be,
to elicit their own imagery,
their own innate intelligence.
>>SHAINBERG: Absolutely.
And that's the key to what I do.
Now, there are some exercises,
especially when we deal
directly with a physical issue.
Then we may find that this
exercise always works.
For example, how does one
bring down the placenta
that's not coming down?
Is there a storyline exercise
that's going to bring it down?
We had this very
interesting event,
because I had just
written the exercise
and given it to them,
when a woman called
from Germany, saying,
the midwife is hysteric.
More than half an
hour has passed by.
The placenta's not coming down.
What should we do?
And so again, it was
Claudia Raiken this time.
She was on the phone.
And she said, we've never
tried it, but here it goes.
And she hung up, and
then she was terrified.
And she couldn't reach me, so
she called the other doulas.
What should we do?
Called back the
woman in Germany.
And the woman said, no
worries, the placenta came down
immediately.
>>REGINA: Just fine,
just by that thinking,
putting it out there.
>>SHAINBERG: The image.
>>REGINA: The image.
>>SHAINBERG: Just the image.
>>REGINA: You know,
that's interesting.
And I had forgotten
about this until just now
in this conversation.
Years ago, I used to be
present at the birth of babies,
but I did something different.
I worked with their
feet, almost massaging
with the rhythm of
the contractions,
because I knew about
things like color therapy
and how to work with the mind.
What I was doing
was imaging color,
where I would have the colors
of blue and soft violets
around the head to calm the
mind if they were in fear.
And then I would have
yellow in the belly
to start creating the
energizing contractions.
But that happened the hard way.
I had put blue and violet
all through their body, when
they started freaking out,
and it's getting intense,
and the contractions stopped.
So I thought, OK,
split the mind.
Split the head from
the body in this way.
And sure enough, the
mind would be calm,
and the body would pick their
contractions back up again.
And it was just using color.
But obviously I was also seeing
an end result behind the color.
>>SHAINBERG: Yes, you must have.
>>REGINA: And that's probably
what was making the difference.
>>SHAINBERG: No, colors
are very, very powerful
in the body.
>>REGINA: Yes, indeed.
>>SHAINBERG: And
we use color a lot,
but always connected
with images.
For example, if we have
a panicky labor room--
the doctors are going cuckoo,
and the nurses are not calm,
and so forth-- we fill
the room with blue light.
>>REGINA: Yeah, blue.
>>SHAINBERG: And it
immediately calms everything.
>>REGINA: It does.
It really does.
It really helps
the mother a lot.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>SHAINBERG: And then
for exactly the opening,
we have the drop of oil, where
the oil goes down into the body
and starts opening up.
And everything flows easily.
The baby can slip out
with the golden oil.
>>REGINA: And so what are
some of the most common areas
that the people that you have
trained and educated encounter?
And you can maybe give us an
example of a couple people, how
they worked through it.
Like you were just
talking about,
about the blue energy,
a couple more examples
of common problems we encounter
with a woman in labor.
>>SHAINBERG: In labor
or in pregnancy?
>>REGINA: In labor.
Let's talk about labor.
And we'll go back.
I want to go back
to the beginning,
pre-conception, later, kind
of backing into it a bit.
>>SHAINBERG: OK.
Well, in labor, for
example, since they're all
wearing the monitoring
belt, which constricts them
and which often
shows little changes
in the baby's heart, which
create panicky situation,
but are not necessarily as
dangerous as the monitoring
machine is showing us.
So for example, this happened
in one of the births.
The doctor goes panicky because
the baby's heart is changing.
And so the doula
said, close your eyes.
Return back.
Go back down and
look at your baby.
Talk to your baby.
Immediately the heartbeat
returned to normal,
ran smooth again.
>>REGINA: Beautiful.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah.
So things like that, we remind
because we train the mother.
If we're lucky, we get
her before conception.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
And we'll go back to
that part of the journey.
What about another rather common
one, where the baby's just not
dropping?
>>SHAINBERG: Well,
we had that case.
That was a very astonishing
case of a young woman.
They had found some meconium.
You know, there's
this dangerous poison
that could really hurt the
baby, and they wanted to induce.
And they wanted it immediately,
and she wanted a natural birth.
So it happened to be when
I was giving them the class
that the call came in.
We all did the exercise.
We taught the mother, the young
woman, to do the exercise.
Everybody did the exercise.
And that baby dropped
on the instant
and was born naturally, to the
total amazement of the doctors.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
>>SHAINBERG: So
this is possible.
I know it sounds
crazy, but it's not.
>>REGINA: No, no,
it's not at all crazy.
These are principles
in the universe.
>>SHAINBERG: Right.
If you use the images
correctly, the body
responds, because the
body's language is images.
The body picks up the world
through form-- information.
And so if we talk to it
in form it understands,
oh, you're asking
me to move this way.
And so we asked her to open
and open and open and open.
Baby dropped and was born
normally in the next two hours.
>>REGINA: Perfect.
Now let's go back
to pre-conception.
As you said, you like it
when you can get someone
before conception.
And talk about the
process of pre-conception
and then getting through that
delicate first trimester.
>>SHAINBERG: OK.
Well, why is it so important
to go before conception?
Because it doesn't need to
be an accidental conception.
It does happen in many cases.
But let's say you plant a seed.
If you really think
about your seed,
and water it carefully, and
really attend to its needs,
and make sure it has enough
light, and not too much,
and it's not dry,
and it's not too wet,
you have a better plant.
And it's the same here.
If your intent is clear
and your desire is clear,
you're giving that soul, that
child who's going to come in,
a much better chance at life.
You are going from an
unconscious conception
to a conscious conception.
You are bringing
consciousness into the mix.
And consciousness is the
most powerful force on earth.
If I want to create
a company, I have
to consciously plant a seed
and start making my plans.
And if I lose interest, that
company's not going to work.
But if I keep on really
paying attention and putting
all of my intent into
it, I have a chance.
It's the same with a baby.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And I think one of the
things you mentioned
earlier, which is so
important, is having it
not just a one-way
street where you're
putting your desires
in for what you wish
to see develop in that child.
But you find a way to go
into a field of receptivity
where you can see what
that being is wishing
to experience through you, that
body, this family, that life.
>>SHAINBERG: Oh, absolutely.
Yes, so when you're doing
this conscious work,
you can actually-- we call
it calling forth the soul.
We actually talk to
this soul that you
have heard calling,
that I heard calling,
that many women hear calling.
We talk to that soul.
What do I need to do
to be ready for you?
Is there something
I need to change?
And very often the
child will say something
like, stop working so much, Mom.
Get more relaxed, Mom.
Talk to Dad.
He's got a problem.
It's so funny, what
we get to hear.
And what is really
interesting is
that when the woman hears
this, she's able, really,
to work in that direction.
Or she's able to
talk to her husband.
Or something shifts because
she's experienced it.
She's seen it.
>>REGINA: OK, now
I have a question.
We're going back to typography.
So if you have a woman with
firmer, square features,
do they tend to sometimes be
maybe less receptive, but more
wanting to project their ideas?
>>SHAINBERG: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: These are
generalizations.
We know that.
>>SHAINBERG: This is true.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah.
So there are ways to
speak to people like that,
to help them to get softer.
Because this is a process
of-- all creativity
is a process of
surrendering, really.
>>REGINA: Very true.
>>SHAINBERG: So if I
want to lay an egg,
if I'm the hen
laying an egg, I have
to relax and let it happen.
If I want to create,
it's not going
to happen by willfully-- no
creativity happens that way.
It just pops out of nowhere as
an insight, a surprising event.
And so receptivity
is an enormous aspect
here of the work that's done
to help women get pregnant.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And let's talk about that
pre-conception state.
I mean, we're in
a world that is--
I think stress is the most
ordinary state of being now,
to be stressed out, to be
worried over finances and such.
What has that done globally
to the birth rates and such
in the Western world?
>>SHAINBERG: They've
gone down, down, down.
I mean, while we have an
overpopulation in the world--
it's kind of a contradiction.
In countries like
the United States
or in France or the
European countries--
>>REGINA: Even Italy.
>>SHAINBERG: The birth rates
have gone down, down, down.
I mean, they're so
low that we do not
know if we're going to
have enough people to run
the country.
>>REGINA: Because they're
below replacement levels.
>>SHAINBERG: Because they're
below replacement levels, yeah.
>>REGINA: And do you think
that's directly related
to the amount of
stress we're under?
I mean, financial stress
alone, it's like, jeez,
can I take the time off
to even have a baby?
If we have a baby, can
we afford to have a baby?
>>SHAINBERG: Well,
it's not only that.
Do I want to bring a baby
into this crazy, crazy world?
How dangerous it is.
And the men and the
women are deeply
concerned about the future,
especially the young people
today.
Will I have a job?
Will I be able to afford this?
>>REGINA: Yeah, to
support a family.
>>SHAINBERG: To
Will I be able to help a
child through whatever's
going to come in the world?
It's so uncertain.
The world is so uncertain today.
>>REGINA: But it
seems to be kind
of an organic cyclical
thing in a certain sense.
I mean, now the world--
the biggest issue,
according to some--
not all, but some--
is the notion of
future overpopulation
that the planet can't sustain.
I mean, there are a lot
of arguments within that,
which is, if you're trashing
the planet and doing everything
incorrectly, no, it can't.
If you're doing
things in harmony,
yeah, maybe it could
sustain even more people.
But because of that kind of
general-- what is the word
I'm looking for?
Like the milieu of the
times and the belief,
the mass belief that it's
overpopulated, might that not
be a natural response
to it, is we're
just having less children?
>>SHAINBERG: I think so.
>>REGINA: Psychologically
we're responding.
>>SHAINBERG: It's not
only psychologically,
it's biologically.
>>REGINA: Biologically, exactly.
>>SHAINBERG: So we
have less people
who set up in partnerships
where they could have children,
especially in Europe and
in the United States.
So yes, absolutely any
stress will affect--
>>REGINA: The
ability to conceive.
>>SHAINBERG: But it's
not only those stresses.
But let's say a woman
has had three abortions.
>>REGINA: Yes, and now
wants to have a baby.
>>SHAINBERG: And now
There's a lot of work that
needs-- I mean, a lot of work.
We do it in one exercise, and
it is very, very effective.
We help them to clear out
the guilt and the difficulty
with the souls that have
left, and that they could not
have for one reason or another.
We deal with that.
They may have had miscarriages.
How do we deal with that?
We work on all those levels.
And then there's another
level that is so important,
is the ancestral storyline.
Grandma, great-grandma,
everybody's had a bad labor.
So I'm going to have a bad
labor because it runs down
the family.
Can we change that path?
Well, definitely we can.
And we need to from the
very, very beginning.
>>REGINA: And a lot of
times a woman will say,
oh, I lost the baby, and
I had dreamt of that soul,
and they were supposed
to come to me.
But a soul can choose
to come later and again.
>>SHAINBERG: Oh, absolutely.
>>REGINA: I mean, the same
soul has multiple opportunities
in that sense.
So it's not as though
we have to worry
that we've deprived
a soul of a vehicle,
because there is a sort
of order and perfection
in the larger picture.
And they'll come if
they need to again,
if you're to be pregnant again.
>>SHAINBERG: We
actually ask them.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
invite them back.
>>SHAINBERG: We
actually ask them.
>>REGINA: Oh, very good.
>>SHAINBERG: Are you
going to come back?
And Mom, if you do
this, I'll come back.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, now, you define the body
far beyond the physical.
Now, this is where
we're getting more
into the multi-dimensional
aspect of ourselves
and bringing life in.
Can you talk about
that for a bit?
>>SHAINBERG: Yes.
Well, when I talk body, I'm
really talking not only,
this is my physical boundaries.
But if I sit in those
physical boundaries,
they start to expand.
In fact, because of my
senses, I can expand
to the ends of the world.
I can visualize China.
From New York, I'll be in
China at the same time.
I've already expanded
my boundaries.
I can see the galaxies,
and so I'm expanding that.
My senses will go as far
as I want to expand them.
And so in that
sense, my boundaries
are not at all what we imagine.
They are in the physical
sense if I get cut.
But I can close a
cut much, much faster
if I understand that the
physical body is connected
to a much larger body.
It's also connected
to the emotions,
because all emotions
move the body.
So the moment I start
working on the emotions,
I'm also bringing a
larger concept of body
into the picture.
And for example,
we have an exercise
called emptying your handbag.
Very powerful.
It's nothing more than
going to the beach
and emptying the handbag
of everything that
is not absolutely
necessary to my survival.
We had a call from Australia.
And this midwife
called and said,
I had this
extraordinary experience
with a woman who
could not have sex.
Too tight.
And so we did all
the manipulations,
and nothing was working.
And as a last resort, I
taught her this exercise,
which I thought was ridiculous.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Like you said,
last-ditch effort.
Why not?
>>SHAINBERG: Last-ditch effort.
And immediately this
woman opened up.
>>REGINA: Really?
So what is it psychologically
in this handbag that's too full?
Which I think most women
can relate to metaphorically
and literally.
>>SHAINBERG: Well, I don't
know what it was personally
for that woman.
>>REGINA: But in general.
>>SHAINBERG: But in general,
the moment she had gotten rid
of every emotional block,
if you want, every image--
>>REGINA: Symbolized by
all the junk in her purse.
>>SHAINBERG: It's
not symbolized.
It really is there.
>>REGINA: Well, I
mean, if you have like,
oh, I don't know, a half-used
pack of gum, old receipts,
and all this lying around
in the bottom of the bag,
those are symbols for carrying
junk forward, aren't they?
>>SHAINBERG: I never
called them symbols.
>>REGINA: OK, what
do you call that?
>>SHAINBERG: These
are real images.
And they really stick your
body into a bad place.
>>REGINA: OK, good.
All right, that's literal.
>>SHAINBERG: So we
literally throw them out
in the imaginal work.
And then your bag is empty.
We wash the bag.
We turn it inside out.
We clear it out.
We keep whatever it is the lady
wants to keep-- her key, her--
>>REGINA: Isn't that a
great exercise for anybody?
>>SHAINBERG: Anybody, yeah.
>>REGINA: I mean,
I can feel when
you're talking about it what
a lovely experience that would
be.
>>SHAINBERG: Yes.
They usually walk away
feeling totally relieved.
And it can affect the
emotions, the mental mind.
It can affect their spirit.
But it also affects the
physical, as I just told you.
>>REGINA: I love this exercise.
I have a group of
women that come over.
I call it the Sedona Tea Party.
And it's literally we just get
together and share information
and have tea.
I'm going to share that
with them next time.
That's beautiful.
>>SHAINBERG: It's in the book.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes, it's beautiful.
I saw it.
I was just kind
of, at that point,
skimming through
the exercise part.
But as we're talking
about it, I really
feel the potency of that.
>>SHAINBERG: And there are
tapes, so it is on the tapes.
You can hear it.
Often it's much
easier to do exercises
when you hear them than
when you read them.
>>REGINA: I was listening
to it while I was driving.
It was really stupid.
It said right up front,
do not listen to this tape
while you're driving, so of
course I'm listening to it.
Oh, that's OK, I
can stay with her.
Now, what about men?
Let's just talk about
that for a moment.
What if you have a man?
They don't have a purse.
What do they empty?
>>SHAINBERG: Well,
their wallets.
>>REGINA: Their
pockets and wallets.
>>SHAINBERG: Wallets are
very meaningful symbolically
to a man.
Empty the wallet of
what you don't need.
But there is a whole
chapter, by the way--
and it was much longer.
I had to cut it for the
publishers-- on exercises
for the father.
And the father
often feels left out
because he's no longer
the center of attention.
In a couple, he expects
this immediate attention
from his companion.
He doesn't have that anymore.
She is being asked
to look within,
and I want to talk to you
about that in a moment.
But he needs to connect to her
and to connect to the baby.
And there are exercises
that the fathers do.
And every father who's
done it has loved it.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
>>SHAINBERG: So they really
connect to their wife,
help to support the
baby in imagination,
and talk to the baby.
>>REGINA: Let's
talk about the woman
going within that you
wanted to go back to.
>>SHAINBERG: Yes.
This is the most
important exercise
in pregnancy, which
is, you close your eyes
and you go down into the womb.
Many of these women
don't do that.
I had a heartbreaking
email from a woman
from Hong Kong who said to me,
I really want to thank you.
Three weeks before I gave
birth, I saw your exercise.
I went down and
looked at the baby.
I had never done that.
I had never felt any
connection to my baby.
And my baby was born, and died.
But now I know how to do it.
So next time, I'll
be there for him.
It was heartbreaking.
>>REGINA: So the women
taking their attention
inward and away from their
partner is not only natural,
it's necessary.
>>SHAINBERG: It's necessary.
But if the partner
does it with them,
then they are connected,
deeply connected.
And the father's voice,
the father's presence,
will be just as
powerful to the baby.
Because the baby, when it's
born, it looks at its mother
immediately.
Even if there are
10 faces there,
it'll look at its mother.
And if the father's
done the work,
it'll hear and look at
the father, hear the voice
and look at the father.
>>REGINA: So this is probably
the most grown-up moment
in a man's life, where he
has to truly be selfless.
>>SHAINBERG: Yes.
And all of these processes
teach the parents
to learn to be parents,
which is selfless,
a very difficult thing to do.
But what I did want to tell you
about this exercise, the most
important thing
about the exercise,
is the mother looks at her baby.
And if it's the week in which
the heart is beginning to form,
she visualizes that
heart forming perfectly.
If it's the fingers
growing, she visualizes
the fingers growing perfectly.
So she is constantly
bringing her attention
and her consciousness, which is
the great power of creativity
in the world.
So if you use it
right, your baby
is going to really develop well.
>>REGINA: That's beautiful.
>>SHAINBERG: Now,
we have had cases
in which baby wasn't
developing well
and in which the visualizations
from one sonogram to the other
changed the situation.
>>REGINA: It makes total sense.
>>SHAINBERG: Right.
>>REGINA: I mean,
if our own soul can
have an impact on the little
developing fetus for what
it wants to experience
through that body,
why shouldn't the
mother's consciousness
have that as well?
>>SHAINBERG: Well, the
mother's consciousness
is actually, through the
energy of consciousness,
connected to the conscious
unfolding of the baby.
And we can correct--
>>REGINA: The myriad
of things that
look like they're going wrong.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah,
physical things
that could go wrong
with the baby.
>>REGINA: That's beautiful to
be able to act that consciously
with the developing fetus.
That's beautiful.
>>SHAINBERG: We had a
case-- this was twins.
And the doctor
said to the mother,
this twin is going to die.
So we went back
in and we looked.
And what was wrong was that
the umbilical cord wasn't
large enough for this baby.
We enlarged it.
And two weeks later, this
baby was doing as well
as the other one.
And both twins were born
normally and are thriving.
>>REGINA: And this
is something we need
to make the point of right now.
This is not an
extraordinary skill set.
This is the power every
single human being has.
>>SHAINBERG: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: All they have to
do is, with clarity and love,
focus their intention.
>>SHAINBERG: Exactly.
>>REGINA: That's all.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah.
And, of course, I
give exercises here.
But I tell every mother, if you
have your own images, that's
even better.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And I'm going to get to another
nuance of that in a moment.
But let's talk
about the situation
where the baby continues to
develop, what they would say,
abnormally.
There's a point
of consciousness,
I think, too that might
be difficult for a mother
or parent to
understand, that that's
that child's creation
and path for what
they need in this incarnation.
>>SHAINBERG: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And not to
take responsibility
if it continues developing
in a certain way.
>>SHAINBERG: Well, there
again that connection
of the baby and the mother
is very, very, very helpful.
>>REGINA: They can see why,
the why back to the mother.
>>SHAINBERG: Yes, and they talk,
or they show in images, Mom,
this is the reason I came here
for five weeks or 10 weeks,
and because.
And they'll show the reason.
And then the mother
is much more able,
because she has experienced
it, to let that baby go.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, now what about the world's
different religious practices
and visualizations?
Do you find that, say, you
have a different experience
from one woman to
another, depending
on their religious background?
>>SHAINBERG: No.
>>REGINA: Because they're
creating their own thing.
You're not putting
images in their heads.
>>SHAINBERG: Not at all.
But I'm very careful.
For example, I won't
use Mary with a Muslim.
>>REGINA: No.
Yes, right, exactly.
>>SHAINBERG: I'm very careful to
always know their background so
that the language that
we use is a language that
corresponds to their culture.
It's very important because if
not, it's going to make them--
I remember a case of a woman
who had terrible imagery.
And I knew that if I didn't
get her out of this--
she had post-traumatic stress,
and there was blood everywhere.
Everywhere.
I knew she was Jewish.
It was pouring blood everywhere.
And I said to her, well,
you're not the only Jew
who crossed the Red Sea.
And she went right through
into the Holy Land.
And I had thought if I
didn't get her through that,
she would die in the office.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
The cultural belief--
>>SHAINBERG: The cultural
belief was so strong.
She crossed the Red Sea, but
she crossed into the Holy Land.
>>REGINA: Well, you
have to be on your feet
when this is happening.
Now let's talk about something
that we talked a little bit
about off-camera.
I mean, most women today,
or a lot of women today,
ideally would like
to have a home birth.
And in certain countries--
I think in your book
it said something like
2/3 of births in Holland
are home births.
>>SHAINBERG: Well, yeah,
they have a fantastic system.
>>REGINA: And that
means they must
have highly-trained
midwives, and a lot of them
>>SHAINBERG: They have a system.
Well, they're a tiny
country, a small country,
in which it's easy to move
the mother to a hospital
if need be.
And what they have is they
have a good communication
between doctor and midwife.
It is understood that
most women give birth
at home with a midwife.
But they have a doctor.
So if need be, they're
transferred to the hospital
immediately.
But in the States, I think the
best solution is a birthing
center in a hospital.
>>REGINA: And why is that?
I mean, a lot of women
hearing this would say, what?
I want to have a home birth.
What about the water birth?
I want a water birth?
Which makes sense.
>>SHAINBERG: Well, they can
have it in a birthing center.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about what
you mean by birthing
centers, what they're like.
>>SHAINBERG: Well, if they're
really good birthing centers,
they have the midwives.
They have the pools.
They have the soft lights.
They have everything you want
for what you would expect,
like, say, in a home birth.
But sometimes it's
difficult to put a pool in.
>>REGINA: Yeah, true.
A bathtub will have to suffice.
>>SHAINBERG: And then they
have, next door, the hospital.
So it covers both sides.
>>REGINA: But why do you
say in the United States
you think that's
more preferable?
>>SHAINBERG: Because the
culture in the United States
is medical.
People, women, go
to the doctors.
And if the doctor says
you've got to do that,
that's what they do.
And it's become so medicalized--
>>REGINA: So it's our cultural
belief that has created that.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah.
It's so medicalized, much,
much more than it should be.
It's now, you're an ill
person coming to the hospital
to have a baby.
Midwives who actually
support home births
have a lot of difficulty.
They are ostracized.
They don't find a doctor.
They can't find the avenue into
a hospital if they need it.
>>REGINA: It's true.
A friend recently
had a baby, and I
wondered about a couple
things that went on.
There was a situation
that probably
should have required going
to the hospital, actually.
The midwives here often will
get into such a strong stance,
which is, we'll do everything
to avoid the hospital,
to the point where it goes
a little too far sometimes.
And a woman can go into danger.
Her baby can go into danger.
>>SHAINBERG: If the midwife
hasn't got a good relationship
to a doctor and a hospital,
it's not a good situation.
>>REGINA: So that's
what we need to look
for if we want a midwife.
>>SHAINBERG: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: One who
is very flexible,
depending on the situation.
And the doctor can--
>>SHAINBERG: And she's
got a good relationship
to a doctor and a hospital.
>>REGINA: Excellent.
That's very good advice.
>>SHAINBERG: And, of
course, she should
have learned Dream Birth.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, because sometimes
your best-laid plans--
and the woman I'm speaking
of is the picture of health.
It was so funny.
The day the baby was
due-- it was a week late.
It came a week late.
She was sitting
cross-legged on the floor,
hopped up, and leaped
across the room.
She'd been on a hike that day.
But I mean, as though she had
no extra weight on her body
whatsoever, just leaping along.
And so you would
expect maybe that might
be a little easier
birth, but it turned out
to be a very
difficult situation.
And getting the mind
out of that place,
I'm having this perfect
birth-- and she's
quite a conscious woman.
Best-laid plans, as they say.
>>SHAINBERG: It's actually
women who want a natural birth,
and for some reason cannot.
They get very sad.
They have a hard
time afterwards.
And we have to remind them
always, the body knows best.
And your baby knows best.
You have to-- the
only important thing
is your baby's born healthy.
>>REGINA: That's the
only important thing,
you're both safe.
And you have exercises
in there for that,
also for general postpartum
blues for mothers as well,
and how to start dealing
with the separation
and this new responsibility.
I mean, you have done your
work here in this book.
You have a lot of very
beautiful and useful exercises.
>>SHAINBERG: I hope so.
We have many more.
>>REGINA: Well,
that's a good start.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah, we
have many more in there.
But it's for the trained
birth professionals
to use them, because
these are ones
that can be done by anybody.
And so those are the ones
that I put in the exercises.
>>REGINA: So let's look
at the opposite lens.
Here we have women--
we've been talking
about women who want to
communicate, do this naturally.
And then you have,
some would say,
a very unconscious
medical industry
where the doctor suggests a
cesarean because he doesn't
want to work that weekend.
>>SHAINBERG: Right.
>>REGINA: Comments?
>>SHAINBERG: It's very common.
30% of births are cesareans.
It's not the exact number.
I don't know what
the latest number is.
>>REGINA: And what
should realistically
be the number for people who
have genuine medical emergency?
>>SHAINBERG: 12% maybe, 15% max.
>>REGINA: So the
rest is elective.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah.
I mean, there are women
who say, I want a cesarean.
That's it.
I want--
>>REGINA: Don't want the pain.
>>SHAINBERG: We do not fight.
We always explore with the
woman what she really wants.
I had a student like that.
Her mother had had a horrible
birth and nearly died.
And she wanted a
cesarean, so she
had her first baby with
a cesarean, second baby
with a cesarean.
But unfortunately, because
of the first cesarean,
she nearly bled to death.
So it was like a self-fulfilling
prophecy, because the mother
had nearly bled to death.
But she didn't want to
change that mindset.
And we cannot force people.
All we can do is
stimulate the inside.
And the inside, if it has the
power to transform itself,
will do that.
In that case, no, the
inside was very clearly,
no, I'm not going to do that.
So if we'd had more
time, if-- who knows?
But this did not happen.
>>REGINA: Pregnancy and birth
requires extreme flexibility.
>>SHAINBERG: Extreme.
And we always tell them,
whatever your inside shows you
that you need to do, we support.
>>REGINA: Follow that first.
>>SHAINBERG: We follow
that first and foremost.
We'll never go against
what the-- we had a case,
and that was an interesting
case of a woman who
had been raped in a war
situation, an absolutely
terrible situation.
And I had worked on her
post-traumatic stress
a long time.
>>REGINA: And she was
pregnant as a result of--
>>SHAINBERG: No.
She was pregnant much later.
But she wanted to keep the baby
because it had been a genocide.
All her family had gone.
So I understood she
wanted to keep the baby,
although the situation
was dramatic.
But she kept the baby.
She had all the support we gave
her from the beginning-- all
the imagery, all the work.
She'd done the imagery.
When it came time for the baby
to be born-- baby in place,
fully dilated-- nope.
Nope.
That baby would not come out.
>>REGINA: Was not coming.
>>SHAINBERG: Why?
It's dirty down there.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah.
And that baby was
born by cesarean,
although we had worked
on cleaning that.
>>REGINA: Because
things had happened
that were not desirable.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah.
And so she would not
let that baby be born.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>SHAINBERG: So the power
of emotion is great.
And we supported her
then in her choice
because that's what
the body wanted to do.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SHAINBERG: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And you would
have caused more trauma
to try to go against it.
>>SHAINBERG: Never
go against it.
>>REGINA: Any final thoughts?
We have only a
couple minutes left.
>>SHAINBERG: What I would like,
of course, is for all babies
to be born consciously, for all
women to conceive consciously
and to put loving attention
into their pregnancies,
and that this would fill
their homes with love.
And God knows, today
it seems we need
more and more of that
female consciousness
to grow, and not to be caught
so much by the stresses of maybe
a male society that pushes
us to a lot of busyness,
and a lot of competition,
and career, and money,
and come back to the intuition
and the true knowledge which is
inside of us and in our bodies.
And if the women could
switch back into that,
the power of the subconscious,
the power of the intuition,
is like a shortcut.
It's going to take you
exactly where you need
to go so fast and so easily.
>>REGINA: Beautifully said.
And the reality is too, if
the men come in it with you
and participate in this
process with the woman,
then we start seeing larger
changes in society as well
about nurturing new life.
>>SHAINBERG: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Thank you
so much for your time.
You've done a beaut--
>>SHAINBERG: Thank you.
>>REGINA: I would
recommend that for anyone
who's considering
having a child,
or who is already pregnant.
Beautiful work.
Thank you.
>>SHAINBERG: Thank you, Regina.
>>REGINA: Again, the name
of the book is "DreamBirth."
Along that line,
you may also want
to watch my interview
in the CMN archives
with Elena Tonetti-Vladimirova,
who was raised in the Soviet
Russia.
She speaks of what happens
when bonding is not allowed.
It's a shocking story, and
almost the opposite of this,
showing the need for this
kind of work together.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[THEME MUSIC]